When we ask a computer to
perform an operation for us,
we usually need to store values
and give them names so that
we can refer to them later.
This is where variables
come in handy.
Variables are names
that we give to
certain values in our programs.
Those values can be
of any data type;
numbers, strings or even
the results of operations.
We already used
variables in some of
our initial examples like using
them to store a name or a value.
Now we are going to
learn exactly how
they work and how to
make the most of them.
Think of variables as
containers for data.
When you create a
variable in your code,
your computer reserves a chunk of
its own memory to
store that value.
This lets the computer access the
variable later to read
or modify the value.
Let's see this in action.
Imagine a simple script
that calculates the area of
a rectangle using
the formula area
equals length times width.
Area, length and width can all be
represented by
variables like this.
In this script we are creating
three variables and storing
different values in each.
The process of storing a value
inside a variable is
called assignment.
Here we assign the length
variable the value of 10.
We assign the width
variable the value
of two and we assign the area
variable with the result of
the expression
length times width.
An expression is a
combination of numbers,
symbols or other variables that
produce a result when evaluated.
In this example, we are
multiplying the value of
two variables to arrive at
the value that we want.
Finally, we use our old
friend the print function to
display the value of the area
on the screen. All right.
We have just seen how to
assign values to variables,
use expressions to calculate
more complex values and then
print the contents of a variable.
Variables are important in
programming because they let
you perform operations
on data that may change.
For example, if we extended
our rectangle script to
accept any input as the value
of the length and
width variables,
we could calculate the
area of a rectangle of
any size or to give a
more IT focused example,
say we have a script
that performs
a specific operation on a file.
We can extend that script to
perform the same operation on
any file but only if the program
used a variable to
store the file name.
You might have noticed that we
assign a value to a
variable by using
the equal sign in the form
of variable equals value.
Generally, you can name
variables whatever you
like but there are
some restrictions.
First, you shouldn't use
as variable names any of
the key words or
functions that Python
reserves for its own, like print.
Using these reserved
terms will make
your program confusing to read
and will result in errors.
Python also has some
restrictions on
the characters you can
use to define a variable.
Variable names can't have
any spaces and they must
start with either a
letter or an underscore.
Also, they can only be made
up of letters, numbers
and underscores.
Let's check out some examples of
valid and invalid variable
names to understand this better.
I_am_a_variable is the
valid variable name.
I_am_a_variable2 is also
a valid variable name.
1_is_a_number is invalid because
variable names must start
with a letter or underscore.
Apples_&_oranges
is invalid because
it uses the special
character uppers hand.
Last thing, remember that
precision is important
when programming.
Python variables are case
sensitive, so
capitalization matters.
Lowercase name,
uppercase name and
all caps name are all valid
and different variable names,
and that rule on
variables is invariable.